Manual: Reversi

Overview
Minimax   is   a   predictive   game   playing 
technique.   A   minimax   agent   is  perfectly  
rational  –   it   makes   the   optimal,   rational 
decision   based   on   the   assumption   that   the 
opponent is also a perfectly rational agent. This 
is   done   by   trying   to  maximize  the   agent’s 
position by predicting that the opponent will 
try to minimize that same position. 

In   this   exercise,   students   will   implement   a 
Minimax   behavior   for   the   game   Reversi 
(Othello)   with   a  depth-limit.   The   complete 
Minimax   algorithm   traces   all   possible 
sequences   of   actions   from   the   current   game 
state to all possible game outcomes; as such, a 
complete   Minimax   search   is   impractical   in 
typical   game   scenarios.   As   such,   most   such 
algorithms used in practice employ a depth-
limit;   the   algorithm   will   search   game   states 
only   a   limited   number   of   actions   from   the 
current state, then use a heuristic evaluation as 
an estimate of the state’s value.

Figure 1. Reversi C# Application

Rules of Reversi
Reversi (Figure 1) is a two-player strategy game played on an 8x8 board using discs, white on one side and black 
on the other. One player plays the discs black side up while their opponent plays the discs white side up. The object 
of the game is to place your discs on the board to outflank one’s opponent's discs, flipping them over to one’s own 
color. The player with the most discs on the board at the end of the game wins.

Game Play
Every game starts with four discs placed in the center of the board, two of each color diagonally from each other. 
Players take turns making moves, with black making the first move. A move consists of a player placing a disc of 
their color on the board. The disc must be placed to outflank one or more opponent discs, which are then flipped 
over to the current player's color. Outflanking one’s opponent means to place one’s disc such that it traps one or 
more of one’s opponent's discs between two discs of one’s own color along a horizontal, vertical or diagonal line 
through the board square.

Move Forfeit
If a player cannot make a legal move, they forfeit their turn and the other player moves again; this is also known 
as passing a turn. Note that a player may not forfeit their turn voluntarily. If a player can make a legal move on 
their turn, they must do so.

End of the Game
The game ends when neither player can make a legal move. This includes cases when there are no more empty 
squares on the board or when one player has flipped over all their opponent's discs – a situation commonly 
known as a wipeout. The player with the most discs of their color on the board at the end of the game wins. The 
game is a draw if both have the same number of discs on the board.

Structure
In this exercise, students will implement Minimax for Reversi using the interfaces defined in this section.

Development Interface
These classes, representing Reversi game elements, are in the Uwu.Games.Reversi namespace.

Reversi.Player

This enumeration class represents a player in the Reversi game. This is used to identify the players and also to 
mark game board locations, with an additional value for unfilled spaces:

public enum Player { Black = -1, Empty = 0, White = 1 }

Reversi.Move

This class represents a move in the game. It holds the row and column of the move, as well as a value that can 
be assigned to the move’s rank (according to an evaluation function or other algorithm). It has these properties:

public int Row 
(Read-only)
public int Column (Read-only)
public int Rank  (Read-write)

The move’s row
The move’s column
The move’s rank (assignable for evaluation)

Reversi.State

This class represents the game board and current player at a given moment in time.

Read-Only / Constant Attributes

public const int DIMENSION_COUNT, GRID_SIZE
In dictates the number of dimensions of the board (always 2) and the length/width (always 8). These values 
can also be found in the Dimensions property (whose length is the number of dimensions).

Relevant Properties & Operators

public int Score (Read-only)
Returns the current score based purely on the number of pieces. This is not an evaluation function!

public Player? Current (Read-only)
identifies the current player at this state in the game. NOTE: The object does not automatically change this; 
it is up to the student to make sure this value stays up to date!

public Player this[int row, int column]
Returns the entry stored at this board location, with a value representing a player or Player.Empty.

Constructors

public State()
Allocates a Reversi game state object with an empty board.

public State(State source)
Allocates a new Reversi.State object, then copies the referenced source’s entries (including current 
player) into that new state.

Relevant Methods

public bool HasAnyValidMove(int color)
This method will determine if the player of the specified color has and valid moves to make. This method is 
useful in determining whether a player must forfeit a turn when predicting moves.

public bool IsTerminalState()
Returns true if this state is an endgame state (i.e., if the game is over and no further moves can be made).

public bool IsValidMove(int color, int row, int column)
Returns true if placement of a disc at position (row, column) by the player specified by color is valid.

public void MakeMove(Move move)
Places a disc for the current player (according to the game state) and flips any outflanked opponent pieces to 
color. Note: for performance reasons, this method does not check that the move in question is valid.

public static Move NewMove(int row, int column)
Allocates and returns a Move object representing a move to be considered or made at the designated location.

public Player Next(Board board)
Use this method instead of the copy constructor (thus avoiding allocation) to copy board over this object.

public void setCurrent(Player player)
Updates the current player (whose turn it is) for this game state.

Assignment Interface
Students will implement the AI player behavior, matching the specification outlined in this section. The classes 
outlined are found in the Uwu.Games.Reversi.Student namespace.

Minimax

Objects of this class represent a unique instance of an AI agent / its game behavior. While implementations  
must have the methods listed as required, students are also encouraged to write their own private helper 
methods to deconstruct the problem in order to construct a robust gameplaying agent.

Required Methods

public Minimax()
Constructor; creates a new Minimax AI agent behavior.

public Move Run(State gameState, int lookAheadDepth)
Implementation of Minimax. Determines the best move for the player specified as the current player for the 
given gameState, looking ahead the number of steps indicated by lookAheadDepth. This method will 
not be called unless there is at least one possible move for the player.

Recommended Methods

private int Evaluate(State gameState)
Returns a strategic value estimate for gameState based on position and color of pieces. It is recommended 
that students implement a method with this functionality to evaluate board states at the lookahead depth  
cutoff.

Testing
It is important for students to carefully test their agents before submission. Please read the following guidelines.

Reproducibility

In production, we would ordinarily prefer moves to have a random offset, as this would make the agent less 
predictable to players. However, for testing purposes, it is important that behavior is reproducible – and this 
includes case tests used to evaluate student exercises. As such, it is crucial that your agent consider board tiles 
in the following order:

            for row in range(0, 8):
                for column in range(0, 8):

                  # Consider move at location (row, column)

If your agent does not use this ordering, it is likely to fail to meet or exceed the example AI, and therefore will 
be marked down accordingly!

Evaluation

The Example.Minimaximus class provides a method so students may incrementally build their agents:

public static int EvaluateTest(State gameState)

This method provides an evaluation of the game board state which is also printed to the console. This is also the 
heuristic that our example AI uses. Please note that this method is only for testing and should not be left in 
student code when submitted; exercise submissions which use this method in the final implementation will be 
marked zero.

The EvaluateTest method determines a board’s strategic value using the following criteria:

1. A square’s value is determined by the color of the piece contained: White = 1, Black = -1, Empty = 0.
2. If a square is in a corner, its value is multiplied by 100.
3. If a square is not in a corner but is on the side of the board, its value is multiplied by 10.
4. One the value for each square is identified, all values are added together.
5. If the game is over, value increases by 10,000 if the score is positive / decreases by 10,000 if negative.

The student’s implementation should perform at least well as the example AI to receive full credit in all test  
cases.   All   tests   will   be   done   with   the   student   player   as   the   color  black.   For   example,   if   the   Example 
Intermediate vs Example Beginner results in black winning 33 to 30, then Student Intermediate vs Example 
Beginner should also result in a win for black with a ratio of 110% (33 to 30 or 22 to 20, for example). At  
minimum, these tests will be run:

 Beginner (black) vs. Beginner (white)
 Intermediate (black) vs. Beginner (white)
 Intermediate (black) vs. Intermediate (white)
 Advanced (black) vs. Beginner (white)
 Advanced (black) vs. Intermediate (white)
 Advanced (black) vs. Advanced (white)

Submissions
Students will submit a zip file containing the following file(s) at the end of this exercise on Canvas:

 Student.Minimax.cs

Place them in the root directory of your zip file, not in a subdirectory.  Do not submit any other files.

